BoulderCreekForm.txt 0.0.1          UTF-8                      dh:2023-10-08
*---|----1----|----2----|----3----|----4----|----5----|----6----|----7----|--*

                            BOULDER CREEK RHAPSODY
                            ======================

As an exercise in creating music with a Digital Audio Workstation and all of
the digital tools and software that I have for that purpose, I am thinking of
a Boulder Creek Homage, based on the forest fire, mud and flood, and expected
recovery.  I favor cinematic forms.

I am asking Bing Chat about the standard musical forms to help refine my
ideas.  All if the quotations are Bing Chat results, edited for form here.

RHAPSODY

Ah, the best choice, although I am pleased for the additional information that
I obtained first.

"A rhapsody is a musical composition that is episodic yet integrated, free-
flowing in structure, and features a range of highly contrasted moods, color,
and tonality. The word 'rhapsody' is derived from the Greek word 'rhapsōidia',
meaning 'recitation of selections from epic poetry'.

"The rhapsody is a form of instrumental music that is characterized by its
improvisatory character and its lack of formal structure. It is often composed
for a solo instrument or for an orchestra and can be considered a type of tone
poem.

"Some examples of rhapsodies include:

 - Hungarian Rhapsodies by Franz Liszt: A set of 19 piano pieces that are
   based on Hungarian folk themes

 - Rhapsody in Blue by George Gershwin: A piece for solo piano and jazz band
   that combines elements of classical music with jazz

 - Romanian Rhapsodies by George Enescu: Two orchestral works that are based
   on Romanian folk music"

OVERTURE

Ahah!!!  It is OK to think of this as an overture.  I still need to think
about form though.

"A musical overture is a piece of music that is played at the beginning of an
opera, ballet, or musical. It is usually an instrumental composition, but
sometimes it can include vocal parts as well. The overture serves as an
introduction to the work that follows and often contains the main musical
themes of the work.

"The overture originated in the 17th century as a short instrumental flourish
or a sung prologue for operas, ballets, or oratorios. During the early
Romantic era, composers such as Beethoven and Mendelssohn composed overtures
which were independent, self-existing instrumental, programmatic works that
foreshadowed genres such as the symphonic poem. These were 'at first
undoubtedly intended to be played at the head of a programme'".

"There are two main types of overtures: concert overtures and opera overtures.
Concert overtures are independent works that are not associated with any
particular drama or story. They are usually played at the beginning of a
concert and are intended to stand alone as a complete composition. ..."

SYMPHONIC POEM

Following on "Overture" I asked about "tone poem"  This was even more fun:
Bing Chat offered me some graphical images along with the explanation.

"A tone poem is a piece of orchestral music that is usually in one movement
and is based on a descriptive or rhapsodic theme. It is also known as a
symphonic poem. The tone poem is intended to evoke the contents of a story,
poem, painting, place, or other non-musical source. The term 'tone poem' was
first used by the composer Carl Loewe in 1828.

"The tone poem is different from traditional classical symphonic movements in
that its music is intended to inspire listeners to imagine or consider scenes,
images, specific ideas, or moods and not necessarily to focus on following
traditional patterns of musical form such as sonata form. The tone poem was a
direct consequence of Romanticism, which encouraged literary, pictorial, and
dramatic associations in music.

"While many tone poems may compare in size and scale to symphonic movements
(or even reach the length of an entire symphony), they are unlike traditional
classical symphonic movements in that their music is intended to inspire
listeners to imagine or consider scenes, images, specific ideas or moods, and
not (necessarily) to focus on following traditional patterns of musical form
such as sonata form. According to the musicologist Hugh Macdonald, the tone
poem met three 19th-century aesthetic goals: it related music to outside
sources; it often combined or compressed multiple movements into a single
principal section; and it elevated instrumental program music to an aesthetic
level that could be regarded as equivalent to, or higher than opera".

SONATA

This has the correct number of parts (4):

"A sonata is a type of musical composition that usually consists of two to four
movements, each in a related key but with a unique musical character. The
term evolved through the history of music, designating a variety of forms
until the Classical era, when it took on increasing importance. Sonata is a
vague term, with varying meanings depending on the context and time period.
By the early 19th century, it came to represent a principle of composing
large-scale works. It was applied to most instrumental genres and
regarded—alongside the fugue—as one of two fundamental methods of organizing,
interpreting and analyzing concert music.

"The sonata is typically played by a solo instrument or a small instrumental
ensemble. The Baroque period sonata was for one or more instruments almost
always with continuo. After the Baroque period most works designated as
sonatas specifically are performed by a solo instrument, most often a keyboard
instrument, or by a solo instrument accompanied by a keyboard instrument.
Sonatas for a solo instrument other than keyboard have been composed, as have
sonatas for other combinations of instruments."

CONCERTO

Hmm ... I would bend the instruments idea here, but the 3-part form doesn't
quite fit.

"A concerto is a musical composition that features a solo instrument or
instruments accompanied by an orchestra or other ensemble. The soloist and
the ensemble are related to each other by alternation, competition, and
combination. The concerto typically consists of three movements, with a slow
movement (e.g., lento or adagio) sandwiched between two fast movements (e.g.,
presto or allegro). The concerto originated as a genre of vocal music in the
late 16th century, and the instrumental variant appeared around a century
later. The first keyboard concertos were written around the same time, and in
the second half of the 18th century, the piano became the most used keyboard
instrument. Composers of the Classical Era such as Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang
Amadeus Mozart, and Ludwig van Beethoven each wrote several piano concertos,
and to a lesser extent, violin concertos and concertos for other instruments.
In the Romantic Era, many composers continued to write solo concertos, and
more exceptionally, concertos for more than one instrument. During the 20th
century, concertos were written by many composers for orchestral instruments
which had been neglected in the 19th century such as the clarinet, viola, and
French horn. In the second half of the 20th century and onwards into the 21st
century, a great many composers have continued to write concertos for less
usual instruments, including orchestral ones such as the double bass and cor
anglais, but also folk instruments."

SYMPHONY

"A symphony is a lengthy musical composition for an orchestra, usually
consisting of several large sections or movements, at least one of which
usually employs sonata form. The term 'symphony' has had many meanings from
its origins in ancient Greek era, but by the late 18th century, it had taken
on the meaning common today. The word 'symphony' is derived from the Greek
word “sumphōnia”, meaning 'agreement or concord of sound', 'concert of vocal
or instrumental music', from 'sumphōnos' meaning 'harmonious'.

"Symphonies are almost always scored for an orchestra consisting of a group of
musicians, which altogether number about 30 to 100 musicians. ... Some
symphonies also contain vocal parts (e.g., Beethoven Ninth Symphony).

"The symphony typically consists of three movements, with a slow movement
(e.g., lento or adagio) sandwiched between two fast movements (e.g., presto or
allegro). The first movement is usually in sonata form (also called first-
movement form).

"Symphonies are regarded as one of two fundamental methods of organizing,
interpreting and analyzing concert music, alongside the fugue. The symphony is
considered one of the most important genres of Western classical music and has
been written by many composers throughout history."

*---|----1----|----2----|----3----|----4----|----5----|----6----|----7----|--*

0.0.1 2023-10-08T16:50Z Initial gathering of terminology for Boulder Creek
      composition

                       ***end of BoulderCreekForm ***
